Add description of an API for controlling SDP codec negotiation (#186)
w3c/webrtc-encoded-transform: sdp-explainer.md

# SDP negotiation in Encoded Transform

The original definition of encoded transform did not consider negotation; the frames on the "transformed" side went out stamped with the payload type of the frame that came in on the "non-transformed" side (and vice versa for the receiver).

This creates a problem, in that when an encoded transform is applied on the sending side, the bits on the wire do not correspond to what the SDP negotiation has declared that particular type to be used for. When only talking to another instance of the same application, that is not an issue, but it is an issue as soon as we want two different applications to interoperate - for instance when exchanging Sframe encrypted media between two endpoints from different application providers, or when exchanging Sframe encrypted content via an SFU that expects to be able to decode or modify the media.

(The latter is exactly what Sframe is designed to prevent, but it is better for the intermediary to fail clean than to engage in possibly random behavior due to attempting to decode a stream that does not conform to the description it expects.)

> This problem is even more acute when the Encoded Transform is used to add support for payload types not natively supported by the browser; without the ability to influence SDP negotiation, there is no standard way to ensure that a receiver supporting the new codec is able to demultiplex the incoming packets correctly and route them to the right decoder.

Reviewer: Can you give an example of "add support for payload types not natively supported by the browser"?

I thought the scope here was more limited, e.g. add SDP negotiation to JS-e2ee.

# Requirements for an SDP negotiation API
The following things need to be available on such an API:
1. Before SDP negotiation, the application must be able to specify one or more new media types that one wants to negotiate for. As a point of illustration, this document uses the type "video/new-codec".
2. After SDP negotiation, the application must be able to identify if negotiation has succeeded or failed, and what payload type has been assigned for the new media type.
3. Before sending frames, the application must be able to inform the RTP sender of what kind of packetization to use on the outgoing frames.

> 4. Before receiving frames, the application must be able to inform the RTP receiver of what kind of depacketization to use on the incoming frames.

Reviewer: This seems like a new requirement I missed. Why does the application need to control packetization all of a sudden? What are the choices available to it?

Author: Because some depacketizers go haywire when the format is not what they expect.
I expect this to commonly turn into requesting a "generic packetizer" when one is defined, but I didn't want to have this document depending on the AVTCORE work on the generic packetizer format.

## Existing APIs that will be used together with the new APIs
- Basic establishing of EncodedTransform
- getParameters() to get results of codec negotiation

# Example code
(This is incomplete)
```
customCodec = {
   mimeType: “video/x-encrypted”,
   clockRate: 90000,
   fmtp = “encapsulated-codec=vp8”,
   packetizationMode = “video/vp8”,
};

// At sender side
pc.addSendCodecCapability('video', customCodec);
sender = pc.AddTrack(videotrack);
// Negotiate as usual
for (codec in sender.getParameters().codecs) {
   if (codec.mimeType == “video/x-encrypted”) {
      encryptedPT = codec.payloadType;
   } else if (codec.mimeType == 'video/vp8') {
      encodingCodec = codec;
   }
}
sender.setEncodingCodec(encodingCodec);
(readable, writable) = sender.getEncodedStreams();

readable.pipeThrough(new TransformStream(
   transform: (frame) => {
       encryptBody(frame);
       metadata = frame.metadata();
       metadata.pt = encryptedPT;
       frame.setMetadata(metadata);
       writable.write(frame);
   }

> }).pipeTo(writable);

Reviewer: This references non-standard APIs and does transformation on teh main thread. This needs to be updated to show usage of the spec APIs. Something like e.g. (note: not exact search/replace as I lifted it from a fiddle, but just to give an idea):
```js
const pc = new RTCPeerConnection();

pc.addSenderCodecCapability("video", {
  mimeType: "video/acme-encrypted",
  clockRate: 90000,
  sdpFmtpLine: "encapsulated-codec=vp8",
  packetizationMode: "video/vp8",
});
sender = pc.addTrack(videotrack);

// ...after negotiation

const {codecs} = sender.getParameters();
const {payloadType} = codecs.find(({mimeType}) => mimeType == "video/acme-encrypted");

const worker = new Worker(`data:text/javascript,(${work.toString()})()`);
sender.transform = new RTCRtpScriptTransform(worker, {payloadType});

function work() {
  onrtctransform = async ({transformer: {readable, writable, options}}) =>
    await readable.pipeThrough(new TransformStream({transform})).pipeTo(writable);

  function transform(frame, controller) {
    // transform chunk
    let metadata = frame.metadata();
    encryptBody(frame);
    metadata = frame.metadata();
    metadata.pt = options.payloadType;
    frame.setMetadata(metadata);
    controller.enqueue(frame);
  }
}
```

Author: We haven't resolved #89 yet.

Now that Firefox supports transferable streams (https://wpt.fyi/results/streams/transferable?label=experimental&label=master&aligned seems to say that), I think it's possible to emulate the main functionality of the "old" interface on top of the "new" interface (and possibly vice versa), but I'll have to do some experimentation to figure out if that is true.

Author: Adopted the proposed code, with minor mods. It's probably still incomplete (apart from totally lacking error handling, which we don't usually add in examples).

6. When transforming frames, the receiving application must be able to check that the incoming frame has the negotiated payload type, and (if reenqueueing the frame after transformation) mark the transformed frame with the appropriate payload type for decoding within the RTPReceiver.

# API description

## Codec description
For codec description, we reuse the dictionary RTCRtpCodecCapability, but add a DOMString that identifies the packetization mode.

The requirements on the parameters are:
- either mimetype or fmtp parameters must be different from any existing capability
- if the mimetype is not a known codec, the packetizationMode member MUST be given, and be the mimetype of a known codec.

When a codec capability is added, the SDP machinery will negotiate these codecs as normal, and the resulting payload type will be visible in RTCRtp{Sender,Receiver}.getCapabilities().

## For SDP negotiation
```
pc.addSendCodecCapability(DOMString kind, CodecCapability capability)
pc.addReceiveCodecCapability(DOMString kind, CodecCapability capability)
```

> These calls will add to the lists of codecs being negotiated in SDP, and returned by the calls to GetParameters. (Given the rules for generating SDP, the effect on sendonly/recvonly/sendrecv sections in the SDP will be different. Read those rules with care.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These calls will add to the lists of codecs being negotiated in SDP, and returned by the calls to getParameters. (Given the rules for generating SDP, the effect on sendonly/recvonly/sendrecv sections in the SDP will be different. Read those rules with care.)
```

> NOTE: The codecs will not show up on the global GetCapability functions, since these functions can’t distinguish between capabilities used for different PeerConnections. They will show up in the list of codecs in getParameters(), so they’re available for selection or deselection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NOTE: The codecs will not show up on the static sender/receiver getCapabilities methods, since these methods can’t distinguish between capabilities used for different PeerConnections. They will show up in the list of codecs in getParameters(), so they’re available for selection or deselection.
```

## For sending
The RTCRtpSender’s encoder (if present) will be configured to use a specific codec from CodecCapabilities by a new call:
```
sender.setEncodingCodec(RTCCodecParameters parameters)
```
This sets the MIME type of the codec to encode to, and the payload type that will be put on frames produced by that encoder. This codec must be one supported by the platform (not the “novel” codec), and the PT does not need to be one negotiated in the SDP offer/answer.

When configuring the transform post negotiation, the app MUST retrieve the PTs negotiated for the connection, and identify the PT for the custom codec.

> When transforming frames, the transformer configured MUST, in addition to modifying the payload, modify the metadata to have the negotiated PT for the custom codec.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When transforming frames, the transformer configured MUST, in addition to modifying the payload, modify the metadata to have the negotiated payload type for the custom codec.
```

The packetizer will use the rules for the MIME type configured, or the MIME type on the packetizationMode if configured. (This assumes that packetization is independent of FMTP)

## For receiving

> The depacketizer will use the rules for the MIME type configured, or the MIME type on the packetizationMode if configured.

Reviewer 2: For the mimeType associated with the payloadType?

Author: Yes.

- Basic establishing of EncodedTransform
- getParameters() to get results of codec negotiation

# Example code
(This is incomplete)
```
customCodec = {
   mimeType: “video/x-encrypted”,
   clockRate: 90000,
   fmtp = “encapsulated-codec=vp8”,
   packetizationMode = “video/vp8”,
};

// At sender side
pc.addSendCodecCapability('video', customCodec);
sender = pc.AddTrack(videotrack);
// Negotiate as usual
for (codec in sender.getParameters().codecs) {
   if (codec.mimeType == “video/x-encrypted”) {
      encryptedPT = codec.payloadType;
   } else if (codec.mimeType == 'video/vp8') {
      encodingCodec = codec;
   }
}
sender.setEncodingCodec(encodingCodec);
(readable, writable) = sender.getEncodedStreams();

readable.pipeThrough(new TransformStream(
   transform: (frame) => {
       encryptBody(frame);
       metadata = frame.metadata();
       metadata.pt = encryptedPT;
       frame.setMetadata(metadata);
       writable.write(frame);
   }
}).pipeTo(writable);

// At receiver side.
const decryptedPT = 208; // Can be negotiated PT or locally-valid
pc.addReceiveCodecCapability('video', customCodec);
pc.ontrack = (receiver) => {

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

# SDP negotiation in Encoded Transform

The original definition of encoded transform did not consider negotation; the frames on the "transformed" side went out stamped with the payload type of the frame that came in on the "non-transformed" side (and vice versa for the receiver).

> This creates a problem, in that when an encoded transform is applied on the sending side, the bits on the wire do not correspond to what the SDP negotiation has declared that particular type to be used for. When only talking to another instance of the same application, that is not an issue, but it is an issue as soon as we want two different applications to interoperate - for instance when exchanging Sframe encrypted media between two endpoints from different application providers, or when exchanging Sframe encrypted content via an SFU that expects to be able to decode or modify the media.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This creates a problem, in that when an encoded transform is applied on the sending side, the bits on the wire may not correspond to what the SDP negotiation has declared that particular type to be used for. When only talking to another instance of the same application, that is not an issue, but it is an issue as soon as we want two different applications to interoperate - for instance when exchanging SFrame encrypted media between two endpoints from different application providers, or when exchanging SFrame encrypted content via an SFU that expects to be able to decode or modify the media.
```

Reviewer 2: e.g. we have taken care to still conform to the format in https://github.com/jitsi/lib-jitsi-meet/blob/master/doc/e2ee.md#packet-format

> (The latter is exactly what Sframe is designed to prevent, but it is better for the intermediary to fail clean than to engage in possibly random behavior due to attempting to decode a stream that does not conform to the description it expects.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(The latter is exactly what SFrame is designed to prevent, but it is better for the intermediary to fail clean than to engage in possibly random behavior due to attempting to decode a stream that does not conform to the description it expects.)
```

> This problem is even more acute when the Encoded Transform is used to add support for codecs not natively supported by the browser; without the ability to influence SDP negotiation, there is no standard way to ensure that a receiver supporting the new codec is able to associate the payload type of incoming packets with the right decoder.

Reviewer: This "codecs in JS" use case lacks consensus from [last meeting](https://www.w3.org/2023/10/17-webrtc-minutes.html) and should be removed.

> This problem is even more acute when the Encoded Transform is used to add support for payload types not natively supported by the browser; without the ability to influence SDP negotiation, there is no standard way to ensure that a receiver supporting the new codec is able to demultiplex the incoming packets correctly and route them to the right decoder.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This problem is even more acute when the Encoded Transform is used to add support for codecs not natively supported by the browser; without the ability to influence SDP negotiation, there is no standard way to ensure that a receiver supporting the new codec is able to associate the payload type of incoming packets with the right decoder.
```

The following things need to be available on such an API:
1. Before SDP negotiation, the application must be able to specify one or more new media types that one wants to negotiate for. As a point of illustration, this document uses the type "video/new-codec".
2. After SDP negotiation, the application must be able to identify if negotiation has succeeded or failed, and what payload type has been assigned for the new media type.
3. Before sending frames, the application must be able to inform the RTP sender of what kind of packetization to use on the outgoing frames.
4. Before receiving frames, the application must be able to inform the RTP receiver of what kind of depacketization to use on the incoming frames.
5. When transforming frames, the sending application must be able to mark the transformed frames with the negotiated payload type before sending.
6. When transforming frames, the receiving application must be able to check that the incoming frame has the negotiated payload type, and (if reenqueueing the frame after transformation) mark the transformed frame with the appropriate payload type for decoding within the RTPReceiver.

# API description

## Codec description

> For codec description, we reuse the dictionary RTCRtpCodecCapability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the codec description, we reuse the dictionary RTCRtpCodecCapability.
```

The requirements on the parameters are:

> - either mimetype or fmtp parameters must be different from any existing capability

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- either mimeType or fmtp parameters must be different from any existing capability
```
?

> When a codec capability is added, the SDP machinery will negotiate these codecs as normal, and the resulting payload type will be visible in RTCRtp{Sender,Receiver}.getCapabilities().

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a codec capability is added, the SDP machinery will negotiate these codecs as normal, and the resulting payload type will be visible in RTCRtp{Sender,Receiver}.getParameters().
```
in .codecs

## For SDP negotiation
SDP negotiation is inherently an SDP property, and the proper target for that is therefore the RTCRtpTransceiver object.

The transceiver will always be available before an offer or answer is created (either because of AddTrack or AddTransceiver on the sender side,

> or in the ontrack event on the side that receives the offer). At that time, the additional codecs to negotiate must be set:

Reviewer 2: For ontrack is there a design issue here? If you want to add a codec, you can only do that after SRD which triggers ontrack. I know an implementation that will probably not like this.

This is also where I think developers will stumble over the per-transceiver approach. At least RtpCodec does not specify the payload type or we might add a footgun for breaking RTP demuxing rules.

Reviewer 2: If you add a codec that is not understood to the SDP it should not show up in getParameters().codecs.
But it seems we have a problem since receiver.getParameters().codecs is [empty before negotiation](https://jsfiddle.net/fippo/zc7xvLn1/)? (might be a bug, this rings a bell...)

Author: "not understood to the SDP"...?
Yes, that is why RtpCodec is the right interface. The PT is a product of the negotiation, not input to it.

Once ontrack fires, we're in the middle of negotiation, is receiver.getParameters() .codecs filled out at that time?

Reviewer 2: No they are not which might be an instance of https://bugs.chromium.org/p/webrtc/issues/detail?id=12116

```
transceiver.addCodec(RTCRtpCodec codec, RTCRtpCodec packetizationMode)
```
This will add the described codec to the list of codecs to be offered in createOffer/createAnswer. On successful negotiation
of the codec, it will appear in the negotiated codec list returned from setParameters().

Furthermore, the call will instruct the sender to packetize, and the receiver to depacketize, in accordance with the rules for the
codec being given as the packetizationMode argument.

Because it is sometimes inconvenient to intercept every call that creates transceivers, a convenience method is offered on the PC level:

```
pc.addCodecCapability(DOMString kind, RTCRtpCodec codec, RTCRtpCodec packetizationMode)
```
These calls will act as if the addCodec() call had been invoked on every transceiver created of the associated "kind".

> NOTE: The codecs will not show up on the static sender/receiver getCapabilities methods, since these methods can’t distinguish between capabilities used for different PeerConnections. They will show up in the list of codecs in getParameters(), so they’re available for selection or deselection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NOTE: The codecs will not show up on the static sender/receiver getCapabilities methods, since these methods can’t distinguish between capabilities used for different PeerConnections. They will show up in the list of codecs in RTCRtp{Sender,Receiver}.getParameters(), so they’re available for selection or deselection.
```
selection on the sender side, not sure how to best express that

Author: "so they're available to the RTCRtpSender for use with SetCodecPreferences".

Reviewer 2: updated

## Existing APIs that will be used together with the new APIs
- Basic establishing of EncodedTransform
- getParameters() to get results of codec negotiation
- encoded frame SetMetadata, to set the payload type for processed frames

# Example code
(This is incomplete)
```
customCodec = {
   mimeType: “video/x-encrypted”,
   clockRate: 90000,
   fmtp = “encapsulated-codec=vp8”,
};

// At sender side

> pc.addCodecCapability('video', customCodec, {mimeType: "video/vp8"});

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
pc.addCodecCapability('video', customCodec, {mimeType: "video/acme-encrypted"});
```

Author: No, see below.
Unless the browser supports acme-encrypted packetization, of course.

// ...after negotiation

const {codecs} = sender.getParameters();
const {payloadType} = codecs.find(({mimeType}) => mimeType == "video/acme-encrypted");

const worker = new Worker(`data:text/javascript,(${work.toString()})()`);
sender.transform = new RTCRtpScriptTransform(worker, {payloadType});

function work() {
  onrtctransform = async ({transformer: {readable, writable, options}}) =>
    await readable.pipeThrough(new TransformStream({transform})).pipeTo(writable);

  function transform(frame, controller) {
    // transform chunk
    let metadata = frame.metadata();
    encryptBody(frame);
    metadata = frame.metadata();
    metadata.pt = options.payloadType;
    frame.setMetadata(metadata);
    controller.enqueue(frame);
  }
}

// At receiver side.
const decryptedPT = 208; // Can be negotiated PT or locally-valid

> pc.addCodecCapability('video', customCodec, {mimeType: "video/vp8"});

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
pc.addCodecCapability('video', customCodec, {mimeType: "video/acme-encrypted"});
```

Author: The thing here is that the packetizer needs to be something that the platform understands. The first codec is someething it does *not* understand, the second is one that it knows how to handle.

pc.ontrack = (receiver) => {
  const {codecs} = sender.getParameters();
  const encryptingCodec = codecs.find(({mimeType}) => mimeType == "video/acme-encrypted");

>    receiver.setDepacketizer(encryptingCodec.payloadType, {mimeType: "video/vp8"});

Reviewer 2: Is VP8 correct here? This means the encrypted content is still following the VP8 format, i.e. the bytes on the wire have a conformant VP8 payload descriptor?

Author: Yes, the packetizer will add a VP8 payload descriptor. Where it will take the data from that payload descriptor from is still mysterious to me - it should be the metadata, but I'm not sure what needs to be there for that to work.

# Example code
(This is incomplete)
```
customCodec = {
   mimeType: “video/x-encrypted”,
   clockRate: 90000,
   fmtp = “encapsulated-codec=vp8”,
};

// At sender side
pc.addSendCodecCapability('video', customCodec);

// ...after negotiation

const {codecs} = sender.getParameters();
const {payloadType} = codecs.find(({mimeType}) => mimeType == "video/acme-encrypted");
sender.setPacketizer(encryptingCodec.payloadType, {mimeType: "video/vp8"});

const worker = new Worker(`data:text/javascript,(${work.toString()})()`);
sender.transform = new RTCRtpScriptTransform(worker, {payloadType});

function work() {
  onrtctransform = async ({transformer: {readable, writable, options}}) =>
    await readable.pipeThrough(new TransformStream({transform})).pipeTo(writable);

  function transform(frame, controller) {
    // transform chunk
    let metadata = frame.metadata();
    encryptBody(frame);
    metadata = frame.metadata();
    metadata.pt = options.payloadType;
    frame.setMetadata(metadata);
    controller.enqueue(frame);
  }
}

// At receiver side.
const decryptedPT = 208; // Can be negotiated PT or locally-valid
pc.addReceiveCodecCapability('video', customCodec);

> pc.ontrack = (receiver) => {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pc.ontrack = ({receiver}) => {
```

   const worker = new Worker(`data:text/javascript,(${work.toString()})()`);
   receiver.transform = new RTCRtpScriptTransform(worker, {payloadType});

  function work() {
   transform = new TransformStream(
      transform: (frame, controller) => {
         if (frame.metadata().payloadType != encryptedPT) {
           continue;  // Ignore all frames for the wrong payload.
         }
         decryptBody(frame);
         metadata = frame.metadata();
         metadata.payloadType = decryptedPT;
         controller.enqueue(frame);
       }
   });
   onrtctransform = async({transformer: {readable, writable, options}}) =>
     await readable.pipeThrough(transform).pipeTo(writable);
};
```

# Frequently asked questions

1.  Q: Why is the SDP negotiation interface on PeerConnection and not on Sender/Receiver or on the Transform?

    A: WebRTC connections go through three phases: SDP negotiation, ICE/DTLS transport setup, and sending/receiving media. In the SDP negotiation phase, the ICE/DTLS transport does not exist.

1.  Q: Why are the packetizer controllers on the Sender/Receiver and not on the Transform?

>     A: The Transform API is agnostic as to what direction the packets are destined for. The packetizer control only makes sense if the destination for the frames is something that will packetize the frames for sending across an ICE transport.

Reviewer: I disagree with this conclusion. I think transforms become entangled with a sender or receiver on assignment and aren't really reusable or agnostic https://github.com/w3c/webrtc-encoded-transform/issues/209.

I think we can leverage this to simplify the API. Pardon my ignorance if I miss something, but given a codec:
```js
const codec = {
  mimeType: "video/vp8-encrypted",
  clockRate: 90000,
  fmtp: "encapsulated-codec=vp8",
};
```
...I'd like to explore getting from this sender-side:
```js
pc.addSendCodecCapability("video", codec);
sender.transform = new RTCRtpScriptTransform(worker, {});
sender.setPacketizer(encryptingCodec.payloadType, {mimeType: "video/vp8"});
// we're still ahead of negotiation
```
...to this:
```js
sender.transform = new RTCRtpScriptTransform(worker, {codecs: [codec]});
// we're still ahead of negotiation
```
I.e. standardize a `codecs` argument in the RTCRtpScriptTransform constructor options object, that when present and assigned to a sender ahead of negotiation, triggers negotiation-needed. The UA includes these codecs as capabilities for this m-line, assigns payloads types, and figures out packetizing from `fmtp: "encapsulated-codec=vp8"`.

I think this fits better the model that folks set things up for success ahead of negotiation. They can fall back:
```js
// ...after negotiation
const {codecs} = sender.getParameters();
if (!codecs.find(({mimeType}) => mimeType == "video/vp8-encrypted")) {
  sender.transform = null;
}
```
It seems backwards compatible to me that SDP negotiation here is a bonus, i.e. it happens if you do this correctly ahead of negotiation. This still allows people to ignore it like they do today.

Similarly, I'd like to explore getting from this receiver-side:
```js
pc.ontrack = ({receiver}) => {
  const {codecs} = sender.getParameters();
  const codec = codecs.find(({mimeType}) => mimeType == "video/vp8-encrypted");
  receiver.setDepacketizer(codec.payloadType, {mimeType: "video/vp8"});
  receiver.addDecodingCodec({mimeType: 'video/vp8', payloadType: decryptedPT});
  receiver.transform = new RTCRtpScriptTransform(worker, {payloadType});
```
...to this:
```js
pc.ontrack = ({receiver}) => {
  const {codecs} = sender.getParameters();
  const codec = codecs.find(({mimeType}) => mimeType == "video/vp8-encrypted");
  receiver.transform = new RTCRtpScriptTransform(worker, {codecs: [codec]});
```
This removes both `setDepacketizer` and `addDecodingCodec` since these are assumed to be the `encapsulated-codec` (vp8 in this example).

This seems sufficient for use cases 1 and 2, but it's possible I'm missing something.

Author: Three different points:

I agree that *once installed*, a transform is wedded to a particular source and sink. But I think the *api* should not be defined in a way that binds it to a particular type of source and sink.

I disagree that the "Encoder" and "Packetizer" are new concepts.
"Encoder" occurs throughout the document, and "depacketizer" is called out as an attribute of RTCRtpScriptTransformer in section 5.8. "Packetizer" occurs in section 3.1.2.

The proposal seems dependent on all new codec descriptions having an "encapsulated-codec" parameter in its SDP, which would prevent this API from being used to add new standard codecs.
I don't think this proposal is thought through.

Reviewer: This is a simpler API to add SDP to pure transforms (e2ee and add metadata), with no need to define packetization.

This excludes adding new standard codecs, which [doesn't map well to transforming encoded data](https://github.com/w3c/webrtc-encoded-transform/pull/186#issuecomment-1765083234), and instead seems deserving of an API that takes _"a VideoFrame as input and EncodedVideoChunk as output"_.

> My preferential API for chained transforms is readable.pipeThrough(transform1).pipeThrough(transform2).pipeTo(writable).

This still operates on already-encoded data, which seems like an impedance mismatch for a _"new codec"_.
